But about, I guess, I would say
a large part of the essential observations,
measurements from these periods. Ewing also
contributed basically two things. One was his
hypothesis that the mid-ocean ridge was a
continuous phenomenon throughout all the
oceans. and his idea, his claim that there was a
crack down the middle of it, which was being filled
with volcanic material. The other major
observation he made was the Ecclesiastical
Plains. Now, you once suggested too, or at least I
read and assumed you had suggested, that the
oceans are the ultimate receptacle of the waste of
land. Okay. Does that also apply to radioactive
waste? Twice you've mentioned that in the course
of the interview yesterday. Did I? Mm-hmm. You
said that twice you were explaining that on bombs
and waste as they were being involved and they're
coming off the Apto. Oh, yeah. That was part of
our... What we were interested in there was not...
disposal of those things but what happened what
happened to them and and then later on yesterday
also you mentioned the fact that that nuclear
energy uh worries now a lot of people and i assume by
that too you were speaking of disposal of waste of
nuclear energy well i'm speaking of several
things there one of them is the danger of accidents
nuclear reactor another is the disposal of the
ways which is sometimes called the faustian
bargain We're not going to be here for a long, long
time. Maybe we'll outlast our civilization. If
so, you're putting an awful burden on future
generations. The third is the problem of what's
called the safeguard problem, the problem of
plutonium, which is made in reactors and can be
used to make, fairly easily used to make atomic
weapons.
The one part of that that that you're asking me now.
Is it possible to dispose of radioactive waste?
Walter Monk is engaged in this. He's just
beginning a study of this.
And he thinks it is possible, essentially by
burying them in bottom sediments in
such a way that The heat produced by the
radioactivity can get out, but the radioactivity
can't
get out. Whether that's possible or not, I don't
know. That's always been a problem with these kind
of things, that the fission products are so high
radioactive and the absorption of the
radioactive radiation produces heat. And it
produces a lot of heat. You've got to find a way to
get rid of that heat and retain the radioactive
material. Keep the radioactivity away from
hurting anybody or anything. Those are sort of
incompatible objectives. You have to keep the
radioactivity enclosed in something that will
absorb all the radioactivity. like a big lead box.
That big lead box is also a very poor conductor of
heat. So the thing tends to get awfully hot.
But it may very well be that in the long run, we'll
come to the ocean as an ocean bottom sediment in an
undisturbed area as a means of disposing of
radioactive waves as an alternative to the
present favorite of the atomic. energy people,
which is salt, old salt mines.
Of course, the other alternative is not to have too
many nuclear reactors. That, I must say, I'm in
favor of not having the darn thing. I now feel that
solar energy is a much more rational alternative
of all of my sources of energy.
One of the great resources of the ocean is not
generally appreciated is the fact that it is a
great hole in the ground, a way to get rid of a lot of
garbage that human beings produce. And much of the
garbage that you can dump into the ocean is
actually beneficial.
For example, if you dump nutrients like phosphate
and nitrate into the ocean, that may actually
encourage the growth of organisms that we like to
eat, like fish and marine invertebrates.
It's not at all a one-way proposition. These guys
that say you can't pollute the ocean at all, I
think, are just really not thinking very clearly.
The ocean's always been polluted by human
activities, and if we do it right, we're not going
to hurt it. We may help it. On the other hand,
there's some things that we may be putting in that
are harmful, some trace materials, some
poisonous chemicals. For a while, it was thought
that DDT was one of these things that might
accumulate at the surface of the ocean. But it's
soluble in oil.
And that that would interfere with the
photosynthesis of plankton, and thereby maybe do
something to the fish body. to the fish
production. It seems that DDT doesn't accumulate
near the surface very much. It's not clear what
does happen to it.
But one can think of things like that that might be
harmful to the plankton organisms and to the fish,
certainly.
In shallow waters and in semi-enclosed waters,
you can do all sorts of mind-building, like the
Minamoto disease in Japan, which is too much metal
mercury in shallow water. It got into the fish and
into people and had very serious health effects.
And you also have problems with sewage sludge,
which settles to the bottom and seems to create an
environment that very few creatures can live in.
It changes the ecology from the various kinds of
wide variety of invertebrates to a small number of
rather disgusting invertebrates like worms.
Do you think there ought to be some sort of of a
beginning on ways to control the waste dumping in
the ocean? Would you designate a national problem
that should have national priorities? Well, we
are doing it. Too much, I think.
I think it's always a good idea to know what you're
doing. It's a good idea to look at these outfalls,
these waste outfalls.
see what happens to the material and whether it's
beneficial or
harmful. But I'm not really, I'm not at all in
agreement with Cousteau who says we're killing
the ocean. I don't really think we are killing the
ocean. You ought
to talk to John Isaacs about that. Now, I have
another quote that I'd like for you to comment on.
You suggested one time in and some things that
you'd written, that scientists should be
involved in politics. Do you still believe that
scientists should be more or less active
politically? Well, when I said involved with
politics, I don't think I meant that they should be
politicians. Oh, no. I assumed you meant to
influence, as a matter of fact, political
decisions. I think that politicians and
scientists have got to learn how to work together.
I wrote my presidential address at AAAS, was
called a politician in the sciences. Did you see
that? There's really nothing that I can say that I
didn't say there. But I meant every word of that.
And I basically mean that
our world is changing so rapidly because of
changing technology and increasing knowledge.
It's very complex effects in terms of population
growth, resource depletion,
changes of ways of life and social changes that
result from those changes in the ways of life, like
urbanization.
But politicians need to have as good an
understanding as possible as they can of what
their options are and what the probabilities are.
The difficulty here is that politicians and
scientists are different kinds of people. And
they're quite different in many important
respects. But the fundamental difference is that
the politician always has to act. He has to make a
decision regardless of whether it's based on
knowledge or just based on an intuition or a hunch
or a gamble. You've got to do something. Not doing
anything is really the same as doing something in
many cases. The result of this necessity to act and
the lack of sufficient information to act on is
that politicians always make short-range
decisions. And they try to leave it. future
options open as much as they can. The only thing
they can do. That's reinforced in the democratic
society by the fact that the poor bachelors have to
run for election every two years. So that some
people say that infinity to a politician is the
election after the next one. But it's true of all
politicians, even if they're dictators or have
some kind of a legitimacy not based on election.
just because of the nature of the problem that they
face. Whereas a scientist never wants to act. He
always wants to find out more before acting.
And he always feels that he doesn't know enough to
be able to make a positive statement. Well, the way
to get around this, I think, is that politicians
and scientists both have to learn to think more in
statistical terms, in terms of probabilities, in
ranges of probabilities. Take a simple case.
What's the population of the United States going
to be in the year 2000? Well, the probability is
that, let's say, 50% that it'll be 230 million
people, plus or minus 5 million. The probability
is maybe 20% that it'll somewhere between 240 and
220 million people. Probability is maybe 10%.
It'll be somewhere between 245 and 210 million
people, and so forth. And one has to prepare for
this range of probabilities as best one can, not
saying Not saying we're going to plan for 230
million people, plus or minus . But that is the most
likely thing to do. So we want to put most of our
effort into preparing for that. Less effort, but
some effort into preparing for more or less, in
accordance with our range of probabilities. And
demographers have to learn to make their
forecasts or their projections in terms of
probabilities. But meteorologists have already
learned this. Meteorologists say that the
chances are 20% it's going to rain tomorrow, or
they're 80%. Well, it never says 100% chance it's
going to rain tomorrow, or zero chance it's going
to rain tomorrow. But everybody who's concerned
about the weather learns to act on these
probabilities. And you try to take out insurance
against the unlikely event occurring. some kind
of insurance, either monetary insurance or
alternate plans or something. Going on a picnic,
you usually have to have an alternate plan,
because you're dealing with probabilities.
Unless you're . He's dead now, unfortunately.
But the other thing that politicians and what
scientists need to learn in order to work together
is to understand
how these two different groups of people think.
Politicians like to use an adversary procedure,
because they're mostly lawyers. Scientists take
a very dim view of adversary procedures. They much
prefer committee discussion, in which you pound
out a kind of a consensus or compromise position,
but not You don't simply present the argument on
both sides and leave it to the politician to decide
between
those two sides. And both modes of operation have
their place and their value, but they're
different methods.
Alvin Weinberg has talked about this a good deal,
what he calls trans-scientific problems and
trans-scientific problems. Transcience
problems involve values that are not scientific.
What you like, what you dislike, what you want,
what you don't want, what you think is moral and
what you think is immoral. None of these are
scientific questions. You can't really argue
about a scientific question, but you can argue
about values. And the reason you can argue about
values is that values are always in conflict, and
you therefore have to analyze or to... to
try to give relative weights to different values.
You do this by argument.
Science really is not an arguable subject. It's a
subject which you either know or you don't know.
Most of the time you don't know, but you do know
some. The whole business of technology
assessment is a good example of the way in which
scientists Technologists and politicians need
to interact. Another of them deals with policy for
science.
The politicians need to be convinced
that science operates in a somewhat different way
than they're used to. You can't go out and say, I'm
going to make a discovery. I'm going to discover
how to cure cancer. And maybe the best way to cure
cancer is not to work on cancer at all. to work on the
basic biology of the
metabolism and the reproduction of cell
reproduction.
And this is hard for the politician to get through
his head. He always is liable to say, what have you
done for me lately? Well, you can't say what you've
done for him lately. You've changed the world over
the course of 100 years. But you don't know quite
what's going to happen next. And this is the
essence of scientific approach, very
unsatisfactory to the politician, and vice
versa. But these are all barriers and
difficulties, constraints, in the way of
scientists and politicians working together. It
doesn't mean there's any less need for them to work
together. Well, all of this you'll learn. I'm just
saying, I'm just repeating what I said in that
residential address. But you still essentially
agree with that, you don't? Oh, sure. You've not
changed your mind at all, okay. That was only a
couple of years ago. People's minds change
quickly, believe me. In 1958, you said the
oceanography was far behind land sciences. Would
you still agree with that? Do you think in the last
18 years that that has changed?
Oh, Athelstan Steelhouse used to put it pretty
well. He said, we don't even know more about the
moon's backside than we are about the ocean's
bottom.
I don't know. The
ocean is a very much more difficult place to find
out about than the land is.
On the other hand,
I guess
I ask myself about the problems of land science and
ocean science that are more or less related to each
other, namely the ecological problems, the
problems of climate and weather, the problems of
geological processes on land and in the sea,
the theological and geophysical processes.
and consider the relative importance of the two.
For example, food production is almost entirely a
land science, only to a minor extent an ocean
science. I guess with my broader perspective
about agriculture and about food production
and about the environment, which is, again, For
most people, a land environment.
I would say that on the problems that are important
to people, the practical problem that affect
people's lives in fundamental ways,
the land signs are pretty backward, too. We have no
idea how to predict climate. We can't predict
weather more than about four or five days in
advance. We don't really understand
how ecosystems work on land any more than we do in
the ocean. We don't
know what we're doing to the environment on the
land in many fundamental and important ways.
So I guess it's compared to their odious in that
case. In both areas, our ignorance is too large,
too great. Well, the next two questions I have
consider both of those areas I have listed on my
question to ask you. Both hazard, as a matter of
fact, a scientific guess.
What do you suppose the development of the oceans
in the immediate future, let's say, define the
immediate future of the next 50 years will be? Will
we concentrate more on mineral resources, food
resources, or will we continue in this area of
exploration of the oceans?
I don't think we'll continue the exploration
for a variety of reasons.
One reason is the law of the sea conference is going
to make it difficult. The other reason is that
we've probably done most of the things, not
everything, but most of the things we can with the
tools we have and the understanding we have. What
we need now is to get more understanding of ocean
processes. For example, what is the size of the
circulation cells in the ocean?
It looks as if they're relatively small compared
to, let's say, the Hadley cells in the atmosphere,
that you can deal with most motions in the ocean on a
scale of a couple hundred miles. These big eddies
in the Gulf Stream and the Kuroshio
are not the size of the planetary eddies in the
atmosphere. They have a different scale, and we
don't really understand that scale. We need to be
able to do as Walter Munk is thinking of doing to
make measurements, integrative measurements,
measurements which tell you what the average
conditions are over, say, a 50-mile square, 50
miles on the side. And one way to do that is to use
acoustics, underwater acoustics, statistics of
underwater
acoustics. Always in the past, we've made spot
measurements in the ocean, either vertical
series or a series of horizontal points, usually a
lot of vertical series. But the distances between
those vertical series are so large, And the
intervals in time are so great that the results are
very unsatisfactory. We need to be able to measure
the state of the ocean all over, over a large piece
of it, within a very short time. You can't do this by
the standard oceanographic technique of
measuring, of taking oceanographic stations.
Nor can you do it from a satellite. The satellite
can't see below the surface for a few meters. You
may be able to do it with a great many buoys, but
that's certainly a hard way to do it. Possibly the
best way to do it would be with integrating
measurements. You have two buoys which measure
the sound velocity and the sound scattering and
the sound absorption. and the refraction of rays
on a continuing basis, which give you an average
condition on the line between the two buoys, in the
area between the two buoys, or between two ships,
something like that. In other words, we need to be
able to get more meaningful measurements
with fewer with fewer observing points.
And until we're able to do that, in other words,
until we're able to develop a new set of tools, a new
set of instruments for exploration, I think we
might very well
be running out our string on exploration with the
present tools. And of course, the third reason is
that the people are much more concerned now about
the resources of the ocean than they used to be.
Looks like we're coming close to the limit of how
many fish we can catch. We need to understand the
ecology of fishes, and I mean the ecology, not the
life history or the migrations of single species,
but how fishes live in their environment with
other organisms much better than we do. We need to
understand the the location and the means of
recovery, potential reservoirs of oil in the near
shore zone within 200 miles of shore. We probably
need to know more about the
distribution and content of the manganese
nodules in the deep sea. We need to know more about
coastal
engineering and about the problems of ports,
harbors, and navigation as ocean traffic builds
up. The amount of overseas trade is now at a level
that nobody even imagined 20 years ago. The big
bulk carriers represented by various kinds of
hazards, they're so hard to maneuver. Need
perhaps a new system for handling those things.
Much perhaps something like we handle airplanes.
Rigorously control the position at all times.
I would guess that, I'm not necessarily saying I'm
in favor of this, I would think it's likely that
ocean engineering and applied ocean science
are going to be more prominent and fundamental
scientific research less prominent over
the next 50 years. I say this myself with some
unhappiness because I think it's an awful lot of
fun to find out things. Not to use what you find out.
One of the things that we may be doing in the future
is building large floating installations in the
high and the open ocean. Maybe cities in the sea.
Maybe nuclear reactors in the sea. That seems very
likely. Maybe big pleasure domes offshore. And
this may be particularly true in some crowded
parts of the world, like Java, for example. Maybe
you just have to extend the land area of Java by
putting a lot of it on the ocean. And maybe this
could even happen in some of the other
megalopolises that are near the seacoast, like
the Boston or the Portsmouth to Richmond
megalopolis off the east coast. I think it's much
more likely to happen off Java than it is off the
East Coast. But our population looks like it was
stabilized. There may be other reasons for
putting installations offshore. That's a big
engineering, a whole host of engineering
problems involved in doing
that.
Guys like Bill Nirenberg are interested in
getting energy out of
the ocean. For example, possibly taking
advantage of the temperature gradient between
the surface and the deep water. Maybe getting wave
energy,
which is a form of wind energy, but more
concentrated than wind energy.
you can concentrate the energy from a large area
and a small area because of the fact that waves lose
very little energy as they propagate across the
ocean. That may be a useful thing
to look at. Maybe you can use marine organisms like
kelp and other seaweeds as a source of energy,
turning them into alcohol or methane or something
like that.